Yocto integration (#1370)
conan-io/docs: integrations/cross_platform/yocto.rst

__________________

The `Yocto Project`_ is an open-source project that delivers a set of tools that create operating system images for embedded Linux systems.
The Yocto Project tools are based on the `OpenEmbedded`_ project, which uses the BitBake build tool, to construct complete Linux images.

Brief introduction to Yocto
===========================

Yocto supports several Linux host distributions and it also provides a way to install the correct version of these tools by either
downloading a buildtools-tarball or building one on a supported machine. This allows virtually any Linux distribution to be able to run
Yocto, and also makes sure that it will be possible to replicate your Yocto build system in the future. The Yocto Project build system also
isolates itself from the host distribution's C library, which makes it possible to share build caches between different distributions and
also helps in future-proofing the build system.

Creating Conan packages with Yocto's SDK toolchain
==================================================

Yocto SDKs are completely self-contained. The binaries are linked against their own copy of `libc`, which results in no dependencies on the

> target system.

Reviewer: Mhh, I think this is confusing. The idea is, you are linking with the `libc` of the `host` but in your `build` machine. Mention the idea that the SDK is a cross-building toolchain matching the target and generated from a specific "yocto project" (find other words), so if you specify/enable some system dependency in the yocto project and then you generate an SDK, you will have these libraries/tools available in the SDK, e.g: GTK

Then, you can start creating Conan packages setting up the environment of the Yocto SDK and running a :command:`conan create` command
with a suitable profile with the specific architecture of the toolchain.

For example, creating packages for `arch=armv8`:

The profile will be:

.. code-block:: text
   :caption: *armv8*

    [settings]
    os_build=Linux
    arch_build=x86_64
    os=Linux
    arch=armv8
    compiler=gcc
    compiler.version=8
    compiler.libcxx=libstdc++11
    build_type=Release

Activate the SDK environment and execute the create command.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ source oe-environment-setup-aarch64-poky-linux
    $ conan create . user/channel --profile armv8

This will generate the packages using the Yocto toolchain. Now you can upload the binaries to an Artifactory server so share and reuse in
your Yocto builds.

> .. note::

Reviewer: This shouldn't be a "note". Maybe we should create another section before this one to `Setting up a Yocto SDK` or similar. Mention there how to generate the SDK from your project and the idea of getting available in the SDK all the libraries/tools that you specify.

        # COMMENT THIS: set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_LIBRARY ONLY )
        # COMMENT THIS: set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_INCLUDE ONLY )
        # COMMENT THIS: set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_PACKAGE ONLY )

    You can read more about those variables here:

      - `CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_LIBRARY <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.0/variable/CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_LIBRARY.html>`_
      - `CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_INCLUDE <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.0/variable/CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_INCLUDE.html>`_
      - `CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_PACKAGE <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.0/variable/CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_PACKAGE.html>`_

.. important::

    We strongly recommend to use the Yocto's SDK toolchain to create packages as they will be built with the optimization flags suitable to
    be deployed later to an image generated in a Yocto build.

.. seealso::

    You can `create your own Yocto SDKs <https://www.yoctoproject.org/docs/2.6/sdk-manual/sdk-manual.html#sdk-building-an-sdk-installer>`_
    or download and use
    `the prebuilt ones <http://downloads.yoctoproject.org/releases/yocto/yocto-2.6.2/toolchain/x86_64/>`_.

> Deploying Conan packages to a Yocto image

Reviewer: Deploying an application.

Reviewer: Explain later with an example of an application A that can depend on N conan packages (libraries).

=========================================

Once you have created and and uploaded the Conan packages to a remote in Artifactory, you can deploy them in a Yocto build.

> It is important that in order to accomplish this, your recipes should have a

Reviewer: Not all your recipes but the application one.

Reviewer: Probably it is a good idea to show a full recipe for a fake application.

Reviewer: And/Or link to an example here.

.. _yocto_integration:

|yocto_logo| Yocto
__________________

The `Yocto Project`_ is an open-source project that delivers a set of tools that create operating system images for embedded Linux systems.
The Yocto Project tools are based on the `OpenEmbedded`_ project, which uses the BitBake build tool, to construct complete Linux images.

Brief introduction to Yocto
===========================

Yocto supports several Linux host distributions and it also provides a way to install the correct version of these tools by either
downloading a buildtools-tarball or building one on a supported machine. This allows virtually any Linux distribution to be able to run
Yocto, and also makes sure that it will be possible to replicate your Yocto build system in the future. The Yocto Project build system also
isolates itself from the host distribution's C library, which makes it possible to share build caches between different distributions and
also helps in future-proofing the build system.

Creating Conan packages with Yocto's SDK
========================================

> Setting up a Yocto SDK

Reviewer: New section How it works: Describe (and introduce a schema image) of the whole picture with Conan and Yocto. Where is the developer, where is artifactory, where is the poky project, what is traveling to/from Artifactory, why we want these: 
- Developer experience is the same, build for desktop, then swtich to yocto sdk and build for target
- The poky image building is fast by pulling directly the app from Artifactory. It can be automated in a CI, explain.

Author: yes, this was missing. I have added this at the top to have in mind the general picture. Thanks!

search for libraries in the rootpath of the SDK with
`CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.0/variable/CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH.html#variable:CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH>`_. This is
something that has to be patched in order to allow CMake to find libraries in the Conan cache as well:

.. code-block:: cmake
   :caption: *sdk/sysroots/x86_64-pokysdk-linux/usr/share/cmake/OEToolchainConfig.cmake*

    set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH $ENV{OECORE_TARGET_SYSROOT} $ENV{OECORE_NATIVE_SYSROOT} )
    set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_PROGRAM NEVER )
    # COMMENT THIS: set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_LIBRARY ONLY )
    # COMMENT THIS: set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_INCLUDE ONLY )
    # COMMENT THIS: set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_PACKAGE ONLY )

You can read more about those variables here:

  - `CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_LIBRARY <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.0/variable/CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_LIBRARY.html>`_
  - `CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_INCLUDE <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.0/variable/CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_INCLUDE.html>`_
  - `CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_PACKAGE <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.0/variable/CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_PACKAGE.html>`_

> You can `create your own Yocto SDKs <https://www.yoctoproject.org/docs/2.6/sdk-manual/sdk-manual.html#sdk-building-an-sdk-installer>`_

Reviewer: This should be first: First you learn or read how to create an SDK and then how to tune it for conan.

or download and use `the prebuilt ones <http://downloads.yoctoproject.org/releases/yocto/yocto-2.6.2/toolchain/x86_64/>`_.

Building Conan packages with the SDK toolchain
----------------------------------------------

After setting up your desired SDK, you can start creating Conan packages setting up the environment of the Yocto SDK and running a
:command:`conan create` command with a suitable profile with the specific architecture of the toolchain.

For example, creating packages for `arch=armv8`:

The profile will be:

.. code-block:: text
   :caption: *armv8*

    [settings]
    os_build=Linux
    arch_build=x86_64
    os=Linux
    arch=armv8
    compiler=gcc
    compiler.version=8
    compiler.libcxx=libstdc++11
    build_type=Release

Activate the SDK environment and execute the create command.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ source oe-environment-setup-aarch64-poky-linux
    $ conan create . user/channel --profile armv8

This will generate the packages using the Yocto toolchain. Now you can upload the binaries to an Artifactory server so share and reuse in

> your Yocto builds.

Reviewer: Link docs: https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/uploading_packages.html

.. important::

    We strongly recommend to use the Yocto's SDK toolchain to create packages as they will be built with the optimization flags suitable to
    be deployed later to an image generated in a Yocto build.

Deploying an application to a Yocto image
=========================================

Once you have created and and uploaded the Conan packages to a remote in Artifactory, you can deploy them in a Yocto build.

Prepare your recipes
--------------------

It is important that in order to accomplish this, that the recipe of the application to be deployed should have a
`deploy() method <https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/devtools/running_packages.html>`_. There you can specify the files of the application
needed in the final image as well as any other from its dependencies (like shared libraries or assets):

.. code-block:: python

    def deploy(self):
        self.copy("*", src="bin", dst="bin")

>         self.copy("*.dll", src="bin", dst="bin")

Reviewer: Probably won't be `dll` nor `dylib` in a Linux distro. Reduce noise.

        self.copy("*.dylib*", src="lib", dst="bin")
        self.copy("*.so*", src="lib", dst="bin")
        self.copy_deps("*.dll", src="bin", dst="bin")
        self.copy_deps("*.dylib*", src="lib", dst="bin")
        self.copy_deps("*.so*", src="lib", dst="bin")

Set up the Conan layer
----------------------

> We have created a [meta-conan](LINK) layer that includes all the configuration, the Conan client and a

Reviewer: Describe what is supposed to be the status of the "yocto" folder of the user at this point: Let's assume you have your poky folder (link to some docs maybe), then you have to enable the Conan layer.... etc

> generic BitBake recipe. To add the layer you will have to clone it repository and the dependency layers of ``meta-openembedded``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generic BitBake recipe. To add the layer you will have to clone the repository and the dependency layers of ``meta-openembedded``:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    $ cd poky
    $ git clone LINK
    $ git clone --branch thud https://github.com/openembedded/meta-openembedded.git

You would also have to activate the layers in the *bblayers.conf* file of your build folder:

.. code-block:: text
   :caption: *conf/bblayers.conf*

    POKY_BBLAYERS_CONF_VERSION = "2"

    BBPATH = "${TOPDIR}"
    BBFILES ?= ""

    BBLAYERS ?= " \
    /home/username/poky/meta \
    /home/username/poky/meta-poky \
    /home/username/poky/meta-yocto-bsp \
    /home/username/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-oe \
    /home/username/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-python \
    /home/username/poky/meta-conan \
    "

> After that, a Conan recipe to deploy a Conan package should look as easy as this Bitbake recipe:

Reviewer: And what about cloning and activating the "conan" layer? if we still don't have a final URL (probably we should have it after the meeting today) put a place holder with XXXXX

Author: fixed, will update the link later

.. code-block:: text
   :caption: *conan-mosquitto_1.4.15.bb*

    inherit conan

    DESCRIPTION = "An open source MQTT broker"
    LICENSE = "EPL-1.0"

    CONAN_PKG = "mosquitto/1.4.15@bincrafters/stable"
    CONAN_REMOTE = "ARTIFACTORY_CONAN_REPOSITORY_URL"

> You will have to specify

Reviewer: what

Author: Unfinished sentence. I was thinking that we would need also a way to specify only the name of a remote in order to use it from conan config install. It is fixed now

This recipe will be placed inside your own application layer that should be also added to the *conf/bblayers.conf* file.

Build configuration
-------------------

> Additionally to the recipe, you will need to provide the information about the credentials for Artifactory or the profile to be used to

Reviewer: Artifactory for doing what? explain

Author: I have added an image with the flow and explained this a little bit more

libraries in the rootpath of the SDK with
`CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.0/variable/CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH.html#variable:CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH>`_. This is
something that has to be patched in order to allow CMake to find libraries in the Conan cache as well:

.. code-block:: cmake
   :caption: *sdk/sysroots/x86_64-pokysdk-linux/usr/share/cmake/OEToolchainConfig.cmake*

    set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH $ENV{OECORE_TARGET_SYSROOT} $ENV{OECORE_NATIVE_SYSROOT} )
    set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_PROGRAM NEVER )
    # COMMENT THIS: set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_LIBRARY ONLY )
    # COMMENT THIS: set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_INCLUDE ONLY )
    # COMMENT THIS: set( CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_PACKAGE ONLY )

You can read more about those variables here:

  - `CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_LIBRARY <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.0/variable/CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_LIBRARY.html>`_
  - `CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_INCLUDE <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.0/variable/CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_INCLUDE.html>`_
  - `CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_PACKAGE <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.0/variable/CMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_PACKAGE.html>`_

> Building Conan packages with the SDK toolchain

Reviewer: Cross-building

:command:`conan create` command with a suitable profile with the specific architecture of the toolchain.

For example, creating packages for `arch=armv8`:

The profile will be:

.. code-block:: text
   :caption: *armv8*

    [settings]
    os_build=Linux
    arch_build=x86_64
    os=Linux
    arch=armv8
    compiler=gcc
    compiler.version=8
    compiler.libcxx=libstdc++11
    build_type=Release

Activate the SDK environment and execute the create command.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ source oe-environment-setup-aarch64-poky-linux
    $ conan create . user/channel --profile armv8

This will generate the packages using the Yocto toolchain from the environment variables such as ``CC``, ``CXX``, ``LD``... Now you can
:ref:`upload the binaries <uploading_packages>` to an Artifactory server so share and reuse in your Yocto builds.

.. important::

    We strongly recommend to use the Yocto's SDK toolchain to create packages as they will be built with the optimization flags suitable to
    be deployed later to an image generated in a Yocto build.

Deploying an application to a Yocto image
=========================================

> Once you have created and and uploaded the Conan packages to a remote in Artifactory, you can deploy them in a Yocto build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have your cross-built Conan packages in Artifactory, you can deploy them in a Yocto build.
```

> Prepare your recipes

Reviewer: This is not sequentially correct, we already have the packages in Artifactory, now I need to edit my recipes to create a deploy? It has to be moved.

        tools.get("{0}/archive/v{1}.tar.gz".format(source_url, self.version))

    def build(self):
        cmake = CMake(self)
        cmake.configure()
        cmake.build()

    def package(self):
        self.copy("*.h", dst="include", src="hello")
        self.copy("*.so", dst="lib", keep_path=False)
        self.copy("*.a", dst="lib", keep_path=False)
        self.copy("*mosquitto.conf", dst="bin", keep_path=False)

    def deploy(self):
        self.copy("*", src="bin", dst="bin")
        self.copy("*.so*", src="lib", dst="bin")
        self.copy_deps("*.so*", src="lib", dst="bin")

    def package_info(self):
        self.cpp_info.libs.extend(["libmosquitto", "rt", "pthread", "dl"])

Set up the Conan layer
----------------------

We have created a [meta-conan](CONAN_LAYER_LINK) layer that includes all the configuration, the Conan client and a
generic BitBake recipe. To add the layer you will have to clone the repository and the dependency layers of ``meta-openembedded``:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ cd poky
    $ git clone CONAN_LAYER_LINK
    $ git clone --branch thud https://github.com/openembedded/meta-openembedded.git

> You would also have to activate the layers in the *bblayers.conf* file of your build folder:

Reviewer: I want to see the clone of our layer, we already have the definitive URL.

Author: Ok, but this will make the CI fail as the URL is not public

Author: Ok, but this will make the CI fail as the URL is not public

    /home/username/poky/meta-poky \
    /home/username/poky/meta-yocto-bsp \
    /home/username/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-oe \
    /home/username/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-python \
    /home/username/poky/meta-conan \
    "

Write the Bitbake recipe for the Conan package
----------------------------------------------

With the ``meta-conan`` layer, a Conan recipe to deploy a Conan package should look as easy as this recipe:

.. code-block:: text
   :caption: *conan-mosquitto_1.4.15.bb*

    inherit conan

    DESCRIPTION = "An open source MQTT broker"
    LICENSE = "EPL-1.0"

    CONAN_PKG = "mosquitto/1.4.15@bincrafters/stable"

This recipe will be placed inside your own application layer that should be also added to the *conf/bblayers.conf* file.

Configure Conan variables for the build
---------------------------------------

Additionally to the recipe, you will need to provide the information about the credentials for Artifactory or the profile to be used to
retrieve the packages in the the *conf/local.conf* file of your build folder.

.. code-block:: text
   :caption: *local.conf*

    IMAGE_INSTALL_append = " conan-mosquitto"

    # Profile for installation

>     CONAN_PROFILE_PATH = "${TOPDIR}/conf/armv8"

Reviewer: show a code block with the caption (path) for the profile.

downloading a buildtools-tarball or building one on a supported machine. This allows virtually any Linux distribution to be able to run
Yocto, and also makes sure that it will be possible to replicate your Yocto build system in the future. The Yocto Project build system also
isolates itself from the host distribution's C library, which makes it possible to share build caches between different distributions and
also helps in future-proofing the build system.

Integration with Conan
======================

You can create Conan packages building with the Yocto SDK as any other package for other configuration. Those packages can be integrated
into a Yocto build installing them from a remote and without compiling them again.

Three stages can be differentiated in the proposed flow:

1. Developers can create an application with the native tools in their desktop platform of choice using their usual IDE, compiler or
debugger and test the application.

   .. image:: /images/yocto/conan-yocto_development.png
       :height: 600 px
       :width: 600 px
       :align: center

> 2. Packages can be cross-built for the target device using the Yocto SDK and uploaded to Artifactory in a CI process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Packages can be cross-built for the target device using the Yocto SDK and uploaded to Artifactory, even automated in a CI process.
```

   .. image:: /images/yocto/conan-yocto_cross-build.png
       :height: 600 px
       :width: 600 px
       :align: center

> 3. Once the cross-build packages are available in Artifactory, the application can be directly deployed to the Yocto image without building

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Once the cross-built packages are available in Artifactory, the application can be directly deployed to the Yocto image. This step can also be automated also in a CI.
```

needed in the image as well as any other from its dependencies (like shared libraries or assets):

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *conanfile.py*
   :emphasize-lines: 28-31

    from conans import ConanFile

    class MosquittoConan(ConanFile):
        name = "mosquitto"
        version = "1.4.15"
        description = "Open source message broker that implements the MQTT protocol"
        license = "EPL", "EDL"
        settings = "os", "arch", "compiler", "build_type"
        generators = "cmake"
        requires = "OpenSSL/1.0.2o@conan/stable", "c-ares/1.14.0@conan/stable"

    def source(self):
        source_url = "https://github.com/eclipse/mosquitto"
        tools.get("{0}/archive/v{1}.tar.gz".format(source_url, self.version))

    def build(self):
        cmake = CMake(self)
        cmake.configure()
        cmake.build()

    def package(self):
        self.copy("*.h", dst="include", src="hello")
        self.copy("*.so", dst="lib", keep_path=False)
        self.copy("*.a", dst="lib", keep_path=False)
        self.copy("*mosquitto.conf", dst="bin", keep_path=False)

    def deploy(self):

>         self.copy("*", src="bin", dst="bin")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # Deploy the executables from this eclipse/mosquitto package
        self.copy("*", src="bin", dst="bin")
```

>         self.copy("*.so*", src="lib", dst="bin")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # Deploy the shared libs from this eclipse/mosquitto package
        self.copy("*.so*", src="lib", dst="bin")
```

>         self.copy_deps("*.so*", src="lib", dst="bin")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       # Deploy all the shared libs from the transitive deps
        self.copy_deps("*.so*", src="lib", dst="bin")
```

        description = "Open source message broker that implements the MQTT protocol"
        license = "EPL", "EDL"
        settings = "os", "arch", "compiler", "build_type"
        generators = "cmake"
        requires = "OpenSSL/1.0.2o@conan/stable", "c-ares/1.14.0@conan/stable"

    def source(self):
        source_url = "https://github.com/eclipse/mosquitto"
        tools.get("{0}/archive/v{1}.tar.gz".format(source_url, self.version))

    def build(self):
        cmake = CMake(self)
        cmake.configure()
        cmake.build()

    def package(self):
        self.copy("*.h", dst="include", src="hello")
        self.copy("*.so", dst="lib", keep_path=False)
        self.copy("*.a", dst="lib", keep_path=False)
        self.copy("*mosquitto.conf", dst="bin", keep_path=False)

    def deploy(self):
        # Deploy the executables from this eclipse/mosquitto package
        self.copy("*", src="bin", dst="bin")
        # Deploy the shared libs from this eclipse/mosquitto package
        self.copy("*.so*", src="lib", dst="bin")
       # Deploy all the shared libs from the transitive deps
        self.copy_deps("*.so*", src="lib", dst="bin")

    def package_info(self):

>         self.cpp_info.libs.extend(["libmosquitto", "rt", "pthread", "dl"])

Reviewer 2: ```python
self.cpp_info.libs = ["mosquito", "rt", ....]
```

It is more clear that those are the libraries, and there are no other previous libraries in that list.
Furthermore, is it necessary to define ``libmosquitto``, or ``mosquito`` would work? Most libraries work without the ``lib`` prefix in Linux.

    inherit conan

    DESCRIPTION = "An open source MQTT broker"
    LICENSE = "EPL-1.0"

    CONAN_PKG = "mosquitto/1.4.15@bincrafters/stable"

This recipe will be placed inside your application layer that should be also added to the *conf/bblayers.conf* file.

Configure Conan variables for the build
---------------------------------------

Additionally to the recipe, you will need to provide the information about the credentials for Artifactory or the profile to be used to
retrieve the packages in the *local.conf* file of your build folder.

.. code-block:: text
   :caption: *poky_build_folder/conf/local.conf*

    IMAGE_INSTALL_append = " conan-mosquitto"

    # Profile for installation
    CONAN_PROFILE_PATH = "${TOPDIR}/conf/armv8"
    # Artifactory repository
    CONAN_REMOTE_URL = "https://localhost:8081/artifactory/api/conan/<repository>"
    # Artifactory Credentials
    CONAN_USER = "REPO_USER"
    CONAN_PASSWORD = "REPO_PASSWORD"

Notice the *armv8* profile to indicate your configuration next to the *local.conf*. That way you will be able to match the Conan
configuration with the specific architecture or board of your Yocto build.

> .. code-block:: text

Reviewer 2: this profile is copied exactly the same above? Is it necessary to repeat it?

Author: It was a previous recommendation from a review. I think it could clarify readers the location of the profile, but just that
